## Final Project: Three Story Elevator
Professor Traver<br>
ECE 218<br>
February 2026<br>

### Team members
Dang Duy Hung and Erika Skobel

### Project Description and System Behavior
&emsp;&emsp;The system implements a three-story elevator with a fire safety system to increase accessibility to upper floors and make transportation between floors more efficient. The elevator is a monitoring system that checks for inputs (such as people calling the elevator on various floors) and responds with outputs (such as the motor to move the elevator up and down the shaft). The elevator receives elevator calls and floor selections, travels between floors in response to user inputs, monitors the current floor, and displays the current floor and direction of motion. The system also monitors for fire, which triggers a fire alarm and disables the elevator after it returns to the first floor.<br>
&emsp;&emsp;The code uses functions, tasks, and an FSM to track inputs, control the continuous servo motor, and control elevator logic. Initially the elevator is in Idle state; this means that the elevator is stationary, remaining at its current floor. The elevator will transition into this state again if there is no request detected on any floor during its operation. If there is a request for a floor above the current floor, then the elevator transitions to Moveup state, accelerating to max speed. During this time, it constantly checks whether the floor it is passing through has any requests. If there is a request for the current floor, then the elevator will transition to the Slow state, where it decelerates. The elevator transitions to the Wait state when light reaches the LDR for the requested floor input again. To implement this in the physical system, a hole was placed in the back of the elevator cabin so the LDR is lined up with the opening when the elevator reaches the stopping point at the floor. In the Wait state, the elevator waits for two seconds (to allow passengers to enter or exit), then checks for any other floor requests. When a lower floor is requested, the elevator works in the same way, transitioning to the Movedown state instead of the Moveup state. When all requests are resolved, the elevator returns to the Idle state. This FSM is used to implement logic to improve elevator efficiency. For example, if the elevator is on the first floor, and the second and third floors are both requested, then the elevator will move up, slow to a stop at floor two, pause for passengers to enter or exit, and then continue to the third floor. For consistency, the elevator prioritizes moving up when there are requests for floors both above and below the current floor (when the elevator is on the second floor).<br>
&emsp;&emsp;As stated previously, the elevator relies on the light level of the photoresistors to know its position. As the elevator passes through a floor, it temporarily blocks the LDR sensor. The code uses this low ADC input to know that the elevator has moved to a certain floor and keep track of its position. This way, the program knows when the elevator reaches a requested floor. The elevator slows down once the LDR of the requested floor detects darkness (meaning it was covered by the elevator cabin), and the elevator stops once it detects light again (meaning the hole in the cabin aligns with the LDR). The LDR input data is also used to update the LCD to display the elevator’s current floor. The LCD also displays the direction the elevator is moving based on the state of the elevator in the FSM logic.<br>
&emsp;&emsp;The elevator continuously checks if the flame sensor detects any danger. The infrared flame sensor detector is used to sense fire, inputting a HIGH signal if a fire is detected and LOW otherwise. If the sensor is activated, then the LED and buzzer toggle over a 2-second period, and the cabin travels to the first floor, unresponsive to any floor requests. The system must be reset to turn off the fire alarm system and allow use of the elevator.


### Wiring
Please see the source code for pins and connections.

### Design Alternatives
&emsp;&emsp;The team decided pushbuttons would be best for calling the elevator and selecting floors because they are easier to implement, more reliable, and closer to the buttons used on real-life elevators, making them more user-friendly. Alternative options include switches, distance sensors, and bluetooth connection.<br>
&emsp;&emsp;The continuous servo motor and pulley system was chosen because the team already knows how to code and implement a servo motor, and the continuous servo motor allows for gradual acceleration and deceleration of the elevator. Other options include DC motor with encoder, stepper motor with encoder, and hydraulics (to push the elevator up).<br>
&emsp;&emsp;The team chose to implement an LDR on each floor to monitor the current floor. Just as for the servo motor, the team knows how to program and implement LDRs using ADC pins, which made this option more desirable. Also, implementing an LDR in the middle of each floor gives more control over the elevator in terms of acceleration/deceleration and knowing when to stop. Alternative options include DC motor with encoder, an elevator-mounted LDR, an ultrasonic distance sensor, and magnetic reed switches.<br>
&emsp;&emsp;An LCD displays the elevator’s current floor and whether it is moving up or down. Alternative options include LEDs, OLED, and the computer terminal; however, the LCD communicates the message more clearly than LEDs or the computer terminal, and the team is more familiar with the LCD technology than the OLED technology. <br>
&emsp;&emsp;An infrared flame sensor is used to monitor for fire. The downside of the infrared sensor is that it does not just detect fire, but detects any infrared radiation (such as light sources), which can trigger the fire alarm even when there is not a fire. Alternative options include a temperature sensor or a gas sensor. For the fire system, the team decided on using a buzzer and LED to indicate the presence of a fire, because using an audible and visual alarm is safer than using just one. Both outputs share one output pin using transistors; an alternative would be to use only one output device.

### Starting Repository
[LCD Display](https://github.com/goodmangc/LCD_display_starter_code.git)
